even though most people like to think
that they are rational most humans
aren't very rational
especially when money is on the line and
time is scarce
human decision making can be very flawed
trading is one of the fields where
erroneous and irrational behavior
patterns are especially common
in this video we're going to look at the
most common cognitive biases
and irrational decision making patterns
and how to avoid them
being aware of these thinking flaws has
two main advantages
firstly it helps you avoid them in your
own trading and secondly
it can help you identify and explain
seemingly irrational market behaviors
caused by these biases
most of these so-called cognitive biases
were discovered and introduced by the
nobel
winning daniel kahneman and amos tversky
with that being said
let's jump right into it the first
cognitive bias that i want to talk about
is the gambler's fallacy
the gambler's fallacy is incorrectly
over or understating the likelihood
of an event based on a series of past
events this can be illustrated with a
simple example of a coin flip
the probability that a coin will land on
heads is 50 percent
no matter how often you flip a coin this
probability does not
change so even if your coin just landed
on heads 10 times in a row
this does not affect the probability of
the next coin flip
like the name implies the gambler's
fallacy is especially common in gambling
but this pattern of thinking is quite
common in trading as well
let me give you some examples have you
ever opened a long position because a
stock had many consecutive down days or
vice versa
if so you have fallen prey to the
gambler's fallacy
another example would be the reaction to
a losing or winning streak
if you ever felt that after many
consecutive wins the chances of losing
increased and you decreased your
position size you have been guilty of
the gambler's fallacy
the odds of winning on a trade don't
magically change just because you had
multiple losses or wins before this
trade
speaking of winning streaks if we assume
that you found a trading strategy
that guarantees you a 70 chance of
winning
on every single trade what do you think
the odds of winning
10 times in a row are the answer is
under three percent in fact even the
probability that you will have two
consecutive wins with this strategy
is under 50 percent this means it is
less likely that you will have two
consecutive winners than that you won't
and remember this is with a strategy
that guarantees you 70
chance of success on each trade most
strategies won't have nearly as good
odds
to calculate the probability of n
consecutive wins
you simply have to take the estimated
odds of your trading strategy
to the power of n note that this assumes
that the trades are independent from
each other
and the probability of winning is
constant if we look at the odds of
losing streaks we get a similar picture
here's a diagram that shows the
probabilities of multiple consecutive
losses
with a trading strategy that has a 40
chance of losing
on any single trade as you can see
with a 40 chance of losing it is
extremely unlikely that you will have
more than a handful of losses in a row
so what can we learn from this firstly
no matter how good your strategy is
losses do happen you can't win all your
trades therefore you have to implement
solid risk management practices and keep
the size of your losses under control
next up the odds of having many losses
or wins in a row
is quite low so if you often have more
than 10 major consecutive losses
you should seriously start doubting the
quality of your trading strategy
but always remember even though the
probability of winning 10 trades in a
row is very low
the probability of winning on any single
trade is not lower
just because you won on the last 10
trades
next up let's take a look at our next
cognitive bias namely the confirmation
bias
confirmation bias is the tendency to
seek out information that confirms your
pre-existing beliefs
this is a bias that without a doubt the
vast majority of traders have been
guilty of
after opening a trade it is only natural
to continually seek out information
that confirms your trading idea you
might look at dozens of indicators or
social media posts and only focus on
those
that confirm your beliefs finding
something that agrees with you
is a good feeling and certainly can
boost your confidence in a position
the problem is that by doing this you
often ignore signs
that your trade wasn't the best idea and
something might be wrong
instead you convince yourself more and
more that everything is fine
by searching twitter for a ticker symbol
you're almost guaranteed to find at
least a few people that have the same
market assumption as you
but this doesn't mean anything one way
to avoid confirmation bias
in trading is by having a clear set of
indicators and rules to follow for your
trades
if you have such a clear set of rules
and indicators there is no need for you
to go out and look for any other
confirming signs
furthermore it is best to avoid social
media as a trade decision making guide
that said let's move on to our next
fallacy the next fallacy is the law of
small numbers
you might have heard about the law of
large numbers that states that the
average of a growing
sample size converges to the actual mean
of the total population
this is a very powerful rule in
probability theory
that allows you to estimate a
population's parameters
with large enough samples but like the
name implies this only works for big
sample sizes
this is where the fallacy of the law of
small numbers comes into play
most people intuitively use the law of
large numbers incorrectly
namely with two small sample sizes let
me give you an example
have you ever tried a trading strategy
for a handful of trades
and then concluded that it doesn't work
if so you have been guilty of using the
law of small numbers
a few traits is not a big enough sample
size to give you any significant
information about the quality of a
trading strategy
let me now tell you how you can avoid
the law of small numbers
by showing you how to efficiently test
the effectiveness of a trading system
the goal is to use this trading system
for at least 20 trades
it might seem scary to use a new trading
system for over 20 trades
when you have no idea how good or bad it
might perform
therefore you should trim down your risk
to a level so that you can easily afford
to lose on
all these 20 trades your goal with these
trades is not to make money
but to test out the given trading
strategy
when making these 20 trades try to be as
mechanical as possible
create clear rules for every market
scenario imaginable and follow these
rules on every trade
if you don't have a clear set of rules
to follow you can't reliably test your
strategy
since there is no strategy to test
furthermore
make sure to keep a detailed and
thorough trade journal after every trade
track
entry prices exit prices profit
potential money at risk time in a trade
and more
if you want a detailed guide on how to
create the most effective trade journal
check out my link in the description box
below after you've followed all these
steps for at least 20 trades
you're ready to evaluate the strategy
ideally you should now have a rich
collection of data on this strategy
to evaluate it and make an informed
decision on how effective this trading
system is
i know that this might seem like a lot
of work just to test the trading system
but without having a big enough sample
size
you can't really evaluate anything
making a decision based on one or two
occurrences
is like saying roulette has a 100 win
rate because you won
one round the next cognitive bias that
we're going to look at
is the survivorship bias wikipedia
defines survivorship bias
as the logical error of concentrating on
the people or things
that made it past some selection process
and overlooking those that did not
typically because of their lack of
visibility let's once again look at a
couple of examples to better understand
what this means
if you look around it is easy to arrive
at the conclusion that most etfs
mutual funds and even individual stocks
go up over time
but in reality this is a wrong
conclusion that's because the universe
of funds and stocks that you look at
is already skewed in one direction one
reason why stock did not go up
but instead fell is that it went
bankrupt and a bad performing fund
usually gets closed after a few years
in other words only those funds survive
that performed well enough
so when you say that most stocks or
funds go up over time you aren't
considering all those that didn't
survive
therefore the results obtained by only
looking at survivors can be vastly
flawed
to give you some data a vanguard group
study recently found that an investor in
a large cap growth or value fund in 1997
stood just a 22 percent chance of
finding a fund
that would survive and outperform its
benchmark through 2011.
the problem of only considering a
universe of investments that survived a
certain selection process
is especially common when back-testing
and analyzing trading strategies on
historical data
but also when analyzing success stories
outside of trading
survivorship bias can be a big problem
the results of looking at shared trades
of highly successful people
doesn't actually yield very significant
results
typically many unsuccessful people also
share these traits but they weren't
considered in such a study
which can dramatically skew the results
often successful people
succeed in spite of certain traits not
because of them
the phrase that history is written by
winners very much also applies in
business and financial markets
in general when looking at and analyzing
investments make sure to think about
that what you can't see
is there a seemingly invisible filter
that you are missing if so your results
can be vastly skewed in an unwanted
direction
this brings us to our next common
fallacy namely mistaken correlation
for causality correlation does not imply
causation
but sadly it is often treated as if it
does there are different types of this
fallacy
i will now cover three of the most
prominent causation fallacies
the first is reverse causation an easy
example of this
is the correlation between rainy days
and the usage of umbrellas
when it rains people tend to use
umbrellas much more does that mean that
using umbrellas causes it to rain
of course not it's the other way around
this might seem like an obvious mistake
but often things aren't as clear if for
instance stock a
and stock b are heavily correlated does
that mean that an opt move in a's price
causes a reaction in b's price or the
other way around
another causation bias is neglecting the
fact that the third variable
might be the cause of two correlated
variables for example
two oil stocks might be highly
correlated but this doesn't mean that a
move in one of the stocks causes a move
in the other stock
instead a third variable namely the
price of oil might be the cause for the
moves in both of these stocks
last but not least two variables can
also be correlated without having any
causal link
in fact if you have a big enough set of
data you're almost guaranteed to find
some variables that are correlated
purely by chance
one example of such a coincidental
correlation is the correlation between
per capita consumption of chicken
and u.s crude oil imports these two
variables have a historic correlation
of almost 90 percent over about 10 years
nevertheless i wouldn't use
chicken consumption data to try to
predict u.s crude oil imports
there are countless similar examples of
seemingly nonsensical correlations
so going forward never assume that
correlation means causality proving
correlation
is very straightforward but proving
causality is a totally different story
with that being said let's move on to
the next cognitive bias
namely hindsight bias hindsight bias is
the tendency of overstating
the odds of an event that has already
happened here is a great quote from
nobel prize winning daniel kahneman
about hindsight buyers
a stupid decision that works out well
becomes a brilliant decision in
hindsight
in my opinion hindsight bias is
especially common amongst traders
way too many traders evaluate the
quality of their trades based on their
outcome
this is a very flawed way of evaluating
your trades a trade that has a 70
chance of making 200 and a thirty
percent chance of losing one hundred
dollars
is without a doubt a great trade no
matter its outcome
even this trade won't work out three out
of ten times
but that doesn't make it a bad trade
sadly this is how many traders evaluate
their trades hindsight bias is also the
reason why technical analysis seems so
attractive
finding chart patterns on historical
charts is very easy
but without the benefit of hindsight
things aren't nearly as easy
if you ever felt that the past price
move seemed so obvious you have fallen
prey to the hindsight buyers
to avoid hindsight bias you need some
way of evaluating your trades
not based on their outcome instead you
should focus on the quality of your
decisions along the way
did you have a clear trade plan and
strategy if so did you follow it
if not why not and what could you do
better next time
in general it is best to have a
consistent way of evaluating your trades
that is not affected by the outcome of
your trades
another common bias is the recency bias
recency bias is the illogical way of
putting more weight and importance to
recent events
compared to historical ones this can
easily be observed by looking at the
cyclical nature
of markets the longer a bull market is
the more and more people forget that
prices don't only go
up thus investors pay less and less
attention to their risk
even though it should be the other way
around since the further prices rise the
more they can fall
the same is the case directly after
market crashes this is when people
typically over manage their risk because
they overestimate the odds of future
drops
this can be a great time to sell
overpriced insurance products such as
options and volatility
a different bias that can be observed in
the trading news business
is the attribution bias the attribution
bias is the bias of constantly trying to
assign
some reason to an event even if your
reason has nothing to do with reality
financial news companies are in the
business of satisfying this bias
they seem to have an explanation for
every single price move
even if their explanations sometimes are
contradictory
sometimes you can't break down a price
move into a simple cause and effect
relationship
but this doesn't stop us from trying the
problem is that humans are very good at
finding
an explanation for almost anything even
if the explanation doesn't make sense
basic traits on these explanations can
do more harm than good
so make sure to be careful when looking
at the reasons that financial
news organizations assign to certain
price moves
the best explanation for an up move will
always be that they are simply more
buyers than sellers
last but not least let's briefly look at
the song cost fallacy
if you ever held onto a position far
longer than you should you have been
guilty of this fallacy
the sunk cost fallacy is the tendency to
refuse to stop an action
because you've already sacrificed a good
amount of money and or
time into it sometimes it's best to just
cut your loss
than to further waste money and time on
a project or trade
some costs should not be a reason for
you to stay in a trade
if you wouldn't open your trade at its
current price level you should not stay
in it
regardless of how much you already have
lost one way of combating the song cost
fallacy
is by having a clear trade plan with
clearly defined exit points
before you enter a trade we have now
covered a wide variety of different
cognitive biases
that can dramatically impact your
trading and decision making in general
let us now briefly look at how you can
avoid these biases
first and foremost it is already a good
step in the right direction to be aware
of that these biases exist but sadly
simply being aware
isn't enough to completely avoid them in
fact it is almost impossible to fully
eliminate these biases from your life
since they are so deep ingrained in your
human psychology
that said you can definitely do things
that can reduce the frequency of them
and thereby improve the quality of your
decisions one thing
that can dramatically increase the
likelihood of using these cognitive
biases
is trying to make a decision under time
pressure so avoiding time pressure is
another step in the right direction
one way of avoiding time pressure in
trading is by preparing beforehand
instead of trying to improvise and rely
on your intuition
always have a clear trade plan before
you open a trade
the trade plan should have all the
information you need to mechanically
carry out your entire trade
i highly recommend checking out my entry
and exit guide video in which i break
down how to create an effective trade
plan
besides a trade plan a good trade
journal is another way for you to
improve upon your decision making and
trading
otherwise try to actively monitor
yourself for these cognitive biases
especially in situations where the
likelihood of a bias is high
step back and rethink the entire
situation from another perspective
furthermore avoid making important
decisions when you're in a bad mood or
not fully focused due to a lack of sleep
for instance
if you are interested in learning more
about this topic i highly recommend
checking out daniel kahneman's book
thinking fast and slow you can check out
my link to it in the description box
below
that said i really hope you enjoyed this
video and learned something new
i'd love to hear whether you could
recognize yourself in some of these
cognitive biases
if you did definitely let me know in the
comment section below
otherwise make sure to smash the like
button subscribe and turn on the
notification bell for more content like
this
thanks for watching